If I look at the glass, you'll see that it's what's called pound glass.
It's been spun out on a disc and then cut to the square.
So can you see if you look at that?
I notice it indeed.
That's wonderful.
So you'll see that the system is exceedingly efficient.
How long have you been here, Doctor?
I've been a fellow at the College of Anderson.
and deputy librarian for 12 years, and I think I've been librarian for nine years.
Do you enjoy the library?
Oh, very much so.
I mean, it's really the reason why I'm here.
You say you have people, you have scholars coming in all the time.
What are they essentially looking for?
Well, it could be anything.
It could be anything.
Anything in those areas that Pepys was interested in.
I mean, clearly, he had... Well, I'll show you.
I'll leave this in a moment, and I'll show you.
What is under this case, by the way, just briefly?
Which one?
Well, I'll show you.
I'm sorry.
Oh, OK.
And obviously, we do get people working on the diary.
There is the diary, there's the first page, and there's the last page.
You can see that his eyes were getting... He was having trouble with his eyes, and because the...
the signal have got so much bigger.
So this is the final page of the last one, and thus ends all that I doubt I shall ever be able to do with my own eyes in the keeping of my journal, J-O-U-R-N-A-L-L-P-L 1841, the diary.
And this basically gives you an overview.
Well, there's the first page, and you see, it starts on the 1st of January, not just any other day, but on the 1st day of
year which peeps was uniquely placed to see was going to be momentous january 1 18 1659 1660 really 59 because of the old style so he and he was so precise he put both years 59 60. yes no that was because was that the fashion no no no because new year's day was april 6 because england was still on the on on the old calendar but he
and starts on the 1st of January.
That's wonderful.
And that is the manual of shorthand, Shelton's Tachygraphy, and T-A-C-H-Y-G-R-A-P-H-Y, Thomas Shelton, London, 1642, the system of shorthand used in the diary, PL-14.
And that's the volume of John Smith's transcription.
John Smith is just behind you.
He was the character.
He was the first transcriber.
And he didn't realize that the key to the shorthand was in the library.
Isn't that extraordinary.
Reverend John Smith, 1798, 1870, from 1819 to 1822, while an undergraduate was there.
He first transcribed the diary while an undergraduate at St.
John's College.
So he did it all for the first principles.
What is this here?
It's a book stamp.
It's long.
Of course, 1939.
If you're looking at a folio, you need something for the... I see.
That's for...
So anyway, you can also see here that his shorthand of speed was different from his shorthand in the diary.
Now this is the account of Charles II's escape from the Battle of Worcester, where he hid in the Royal Oak.
And this was taken down by Peaks from dictation by Charles at Newmarket, where Charles used to go for the racing, but it must have been a rainy afternoon and no racing.
So Charles told his most famous anecdote.
Charles' anecdote, PL 2141.
And Pepys wrote it down in shorthand.
And so you see the shorthand dictation speed is very different from the diary.
That is neat.
This is hurried.
But of course... This is one published book, which was published in 1690.
And it's a defense of his conduct with the Navy.
Memo, M-E-M-O-I, O-I-A-L-E-S, Memoirs Relating to the State of the Royal Navy.
Pepys' Single Book, PL 1143, December 1688.
Is it signed by Pepys, by the way?
It's signed by somebody, you know?
Licensed by somebody else.
But, well, it has his book point in it.
And it's his copy, right?
That must be his copy.
It's the license, no, it's the license.
Yes, it's his copy.
But it's the copy which had the licensing on it.
Mm-hmm.
That's, I mean, those are the two signatures of the people responsible for licensing books.
This, and he planned, the book that he planned and never wrote, was his History of the Neighbour.
Would have been a wonderful book.
Which explains the richness of naval material as well.
That is the first edition of Newton's Principia, which has Pepys' name on the title page, because he was president of the Royal Society when it was published.
That's quite a thing for that.
And it's a demonstration about the library, really, because people sometimes say to me, OK, well, it's self-porting books, but isn't this the bookshelf where you put all the books which you want to impress your friends with?
And it's not, because Pepys couldn't have understood the mathematics of the African champion, but he knew exactly what its importance was, and his contemporaries knew that he realised that, because they would never have elected for the president of the Royal Society
twice the only man ever to have been here twice if they didn't realize that he had this the feeling that civil servants administration genius sometimes have or who can do a thing how it can be done without being able to do it themselves but on the whole what he says is rigidly kept to in the library you see he could speak spanish probably his best language well french as well afterwards wife was french um spanish
French, he understood some German, rather oddly he didn't seem to understand, he must have understood some Italian.
Latin, well enough to be used as a Latin interpreter.
Greek.
So, Greek.
And, indeed, he was very anxious to encourage teaching people, gave Greek books as old schools and halls.
However, there's one respect in which he breaks, in which he's not very done.
There are some books in languages that couldn't be, usually just one book.
For instance, there is this, which is, oh, what is that?
Book of Divination, Divine Nation.
Well, it's I Ching.
In fact, I mean, you were still in print.
You can buy it in paperback today.
And this is because he wanted to have one book in every known script.
He was fascinated by scripts.
And his collecting of early printing was for a purpose.
which I will show you in a moment.
This is the book collector at work, by the way.
No, no, it's not.
I think it is.
No, no, no, hang on.
Don't have to spend, please.
There is something completely extraordinary about this.
Oh, yes, you see that, I'm sure.
That's an artist's model book containing animal figure and architectural studies, about 1400, probably English, P.L.
1916.
They're just wonderful pictures of hers.
Absolutely fantastic, yes.
It's absolutely, absolutely extraordinary.
And then you see, at the same time, that, and then a book of recipes.
Uh-huh.
Cures.
Cures and recipes.
Well, yes, yes, but you never find recipes in the 17th century without finding cures.
I would defy you to find me a 17th century recipe book, which doesn't have medicines as well.
And that's late 15th century English, TL1047.
Now, see, this is the mind of the man who wrote the diaries.
in which he records all of the things we wouldn't know about if he hadn't written them down and about what people were having for dinner, that kind of thing.
Go ahead, sir.
I'm just waiting in magic and exorcisms, which is interesting, too.
He was fascinated by books of spells, though he wasn't himself superstitious.
He was very curious.
This is one.
He used to read them.
Those are his ideas of white reading.
There's one of the volumes of the Ballot section.
Now, this demonstrates a way in which he doesn't fit into any modern conception, really, of a poor collector, because his assiduous collecting is ephemera.
The ballads, and the penny godlinesses, and the penny merriments.
These are ephemeral items of the period.
Yeah, he was sold at fars, low, penny, apony.
Ballads one, and a five-volume collection of broadside ballads, including many early examples, PL2005.
The large too.
Yes.
Well, they're all to that side.
They've been cut down, actually.
So he was thinking, this is where there are an extraordinary number of so-called unique writers.
The complete cook.
Yes.
P-L-E-A-T.
Penny merriments and godliness.
Chapbooks sold at fairs and by street vendors on a wide range of secular and sacred subjects.
P-L-362,365.
Bulgaria IV IV.
books for the popular market, often abridgments of old stories and extensively embellished with woodcuts, PL1103.
A fascinating man.
Do you feel you know the man by having custody or responsibility for his library?
I do, yes, I think it's, I certainly know, I think I know his author as far as his, as far as his, but no one doesn't know him because
You know him extraordinary well through the diary, you know him through this, but then there was a whole of his public career.
And his public career was perhaps, for his contemporaries, the most remarkable thing about him.
I mean, it's very interesting that he was obviously in terrible political trouble at the revolution.
He wasn't thrown out of his avauntologies.
He was in the tar for a period.
They had to put him in the tar, because he was the right-hand man of the Stuarts.
in the most important arm of government, which was the Navy.
Now, what I'm saying about is not fitting the Navy pack, but I think it's very easy to put in an immediate frame and put in a kind of vise-like grip.
Is this an elephant folio, would you say?
Yes, I mean, it's his largest.
But here we have
Now, as of all of his collections, his algorithms, meticulously laid out with this margentine, he had no idea he did that for him.
And it is definitely called a collection.
My calligraphical collection, volume one.
Comprehending as well the original proofs of the handwriting of the ancient and several ages within the late thousand years and the competition for mastery between the librarians and printers upon the first break and forth of the latter.
Librarians are scribes.
Breaking out of the letter.
L-A-T-T-E-R.
Oh, sorry.
The librarians are the scribes, and the apprentice of the prentice, as the performances of all celebrated mass.
Which is 1700.
Now you see, again, it's meticulously indexed.
It's extraordinary, isn't it?
um kind of details which other people just weren't recording but it's such such as well it's easier to show you on the print section where he records as well as the name of the of the painter he records the name of the engraver he records the name of the publisher which we find which we find very important today yes but people weren't doing this in the 70th century um the place of publication um
Now, this is really an extraordinary volume.
Yes, but this is what I mean about not being a modern detective.
He was engaged in a scientific study of writing and the transformation of writing from script to print.
So, here we have examples of early writing, groups of ancient handwriting, is what you may call it.
I'm just thinking of this as you speak.
Arranging chronological orders, orders, sorry, with commentaries on them by Humphrey Wormley, who was, of course, the Harleian librarian.
I think there's a book out there about him now.
Yes, there is, yes.
And his diary has been published as well.
Do you know the title of the book on Humphrey Wormley, by the way?
Yes.
Okay.
I didn't remember the publisher, which is annoying, but I...
Who's the publisher?
DAWSN?
Yes, DAWSN.
I was at the library the other night.
Anyway, so there are his opinions, which obviously are taken down in shorthand and then have been written out.
Well, Mr. Wanley is right there.
Yes, that's right, sir.
Now, what this is, is the first attempt to put
to put handwriting in order chronologically, to establish a morphology of handwriting.
So he has put segments, sections, his name is, did you call it a montage or a pastiche?
No, it's an album, I suppose.
There's examples and a fan of commentary.
Are they pasted in?
Yes.
Did you think he did this?
No.
What is the writing in the background?
Is that a lame description?
This is Wambly.
This is the account by Wambly.
Okay, I got it.
Now, most of his text in the early printing was done precisely for this reason.
There are seven caxtons in the library.
but they are there for this purpose and it is it is now the point I'm trying to make about it is that there are very it is not just in the ordinary sense of collection it is a work an exploration
He never had plans to write a history of evolution scripted print.
But he was moving in a circle where there were people very much involved with that.
Can I just hold it there for a second?
You can keep talking this one.
This is a fragment.
I was just pointing it out to it like a textbook.
But what happened is evidently that these were shown to Wandley.
Wandley gave his commentary.
some one he perhaps pulled the rain roses down in shorthand and then expanded it what is that word there what about the year 740 no no 960 yes it goes the whole way across mr wanley this is a fragment of isle free after canterbury
and that's E-L-F-I-R-I-C.
Archbishop of Canberra is Homile de Fide Catholica, D-E-F-I-D-E-C-A-T-H-O-L-I-P-A, and is supposed to have been watched about the year 960, and consequently 740 years old, and this is number 16, and of course that we will
Commentary goes on both sides.
It's very nicely done.
I mean, it's designed beautifully, isn't it?
Yes.
Everything is.
The albums are all material.
I mean, a modern book designer would be very proud of us producing something like this.
We're looking at two open pages, and there are five fragments on the left.
No, no.
I'll show you something from the prints.
From the print page.
Like this, there are two, two, and one.
And then there's one, one, and one on the facing page.
So this is why he tried to get this technical interest in calligraphy, is why he tried to get a book in every known script.
He didn't succeed, but he got some remarkable things.
That's what a white one says on the spine.
You say that is the largest book in the
No, it's not the large books.
There are larger books, actually.
But it's the largest standard size.
How many volumes are there?
A colligual collection of three volumes.
What is that symbol there, would you say, in the middle?
Introduction, general.
General masters English.
And masters English, because it includes English writing masters.
General and Marsters.
Okay.
Another few of these.
They are... Extraordinary.
I don't know what he said.
There's the second edition of the Caxson Catholic Tales.
The Incunerals, of course.
But the Incunerals were arranged to see their particular purposes.
One of the major collections of Incunerals is of Grammos.
So in other words, he could have bought, and the incurable brothels were in common, I mean, they were being torn up to waste paper.
So he collected from certain areas, I mean, grammar, grammar.
And you see, one of the things that he was much involved in was the foundation of the writing school at the Charterhouse.
Well, for instance, here is a Latin grammar.
Yes.
By John Sulp, S-U-L-P-I-T-I-U-S, printed by Pinson, London, 1498-P-O-1305.
And again, it's a functional... That's it.
That whole volume consists of grammars.
Arrains chronologically again.
The Dame of Chess.
Printed by Cax in Westminster, 1478.
I'm dazzled.
Well, I'll just go on and on.
And I can't... We can wrap this up pretty soon, too.
Sorry?
We can wrap this up pretty soon.
I can't go on in desperate time, because I... Now, the print... Actually, this is, you know, any time you want to conclude this one.
The print collection.
Okay.
Seven volumes.
Same pattern.
Again, elephant folios, prints, generals, general, volume one, New Testament.
Well, yes, this is...
Look at the binding.
This is very exquisitely done.
Oh, yes.
This must be about the most considered library, insofar as one library could ever come from one man's.
Now, again, you see the... So this is New Testament, and on the chronological...
cosmographical plan it goes it goes um in fact there are three volumes of biblical programs and they go from genesis through to revelation and the new testament goes from the annunciation uh through um nativity and many of them are well we'll see the name of pullouts um
You see, they're all meticulously... That's a pull-out.
It's not one of the most spectacular pull-outs.
Do you see him enjoying his library every day in the evening?
Oh, all the time.
Well, just the evening.
You see, after 1690, really, when he was out of the tower, his time must have been on his hands, really.
And he was still doing charitable work.
But conversational.
Here's a juror.
And in this collection, the things contained in it are quite extraordinary.
It has to be a little bit cautious actually about it.
And that's a Rembrandt.
That is a Rembrandt.
Yes.
The descent from the cross, second plate, Rembrandt.
That is on page 235, New Testament.
And it's a double truck, as you say.
Yes, but there's also the...
Rembrandt's Three Crosses, which is printed on vellum, which is why it has that.
A couple of that was sold and done to least half a million pounds.
Ours is really rather better.
And there's also... There's three crosses.
Christ shown to these people.
Half a million pounds.
Actually, I got it wrong.
That was a quarter.
Which was the one that went to the Happy New Year?
Question to the people.
That's fine, sir.
No, it's all right.
It just came quick to me because I had eventually to
There used to be an open over-placement.
This could almost be a museum.
I'm thankful that it isn't.
It's odd, isn't it?
I sometimes get people who are very aggressive about it.
And they say, why won't you do that?
Oh, God bless it.
Christ, presenter to the people, Rembrandt.
What is this pencil?
Oh, that's wretchily odd.
I'm afraid that one of my predecessors, well, not one of my fellow predecessors, but in the system.
You see, because this library, for a long time, it was more or less secret, and it wasn't until 1956 that it became, it was reformed again.
It was moved into another part of the same building.
And
It was original here until about 1840.
Yes, and laid out roughly as it did now.
But, you see, people get very head-out about it, because why can't they come to these books?
Well, the answer is, first of all, is to be aware and care of this.
I always make the conditions.
If the book could be decided somewhere else, they must be.
But we do try to give people all the help we can, both by looking up their single references, or by, if they are accredited scholars who have to use something, then of course they're as helpful as we can be.
And we do have very good photography facilities, not bizarrely.
Behind that door there, there is the camera room, which indeed is almost entirely one camera.
And so we are...
as hopeful as we can be with the talk of the addresses.
But the other thing is, these things in print collection, we have no way of displaying them, really.
We keep one.
Normally, when the arrival is over to the public, all of the cases have their comes up obviously.
And we really will have one volume of print collection.
we could not actually display more without wrecking the sense of intimacy in the room and the feeling that it still somehow keeps his private library.
I think this is, I really don't mean to impose any further in your time.
I mean, this is quite, quite much more than I ever expected.
Well, it's extraordinary.
I mean, it is almost so much that it's, I mean, this thing about the greatest
into the sphere of space, you know, it is.
Yes, yes.
Tell me, say something, I have to write it down.
It's wonderful.
Let's just take a brief look under this, and then we can probably stop.
But you see, the print section, it is so sad in a way.
Yes, the prints are better preserved.
It's like the great watercolors.
They only take them out every few years and display them for a few weeks.
It's really best to look at them as reproduction, because otherwise watercolors do not last if they're close to sun and elements.
This is the Anthony Anthony Road.
Oh, boy.
Picture of the Mary Rose, the ship would say.
This is the Anthony Roll, Anthony, R-O-L-L, drawn up by Anthony, Anthony of the Royal Ordinance and presented by him to Henry VIII in 1546.
Two-thirds of the roll were given to Pepys by Charles II in 1680.
It contains the only known contemporary depiction of the Mary Rose, English 1546, PL 2991.
This is larger than the American Folio.
This is quite enormous, I have to say.
Well, it's almost square, isn't it?
It's two and a half feet by two and a half feet.
You see, it was a roll, and Pepys had it bound up.
Oh, I see.
Well, in fact, I will show you what people don't normally imagine.
one of the very very rare examples of um putting a binding on
Now could you put a hand on it?
It would be my privilege.
So he had it changed.
The remaining third of the role is in the museum, I regret to say, because Charles couldn't find it.
When they did find it?
To give it to Pepys.
But Pepys had this, turned this from a role into a bound-up book.
That's what's known as marbling, I guess.
He loved marble paper.
That was one thing.
Of course, marble paper is very cheap.
But it's one thing he really went to town on.
Oh, my God.
Look at that.
How would you describe that?
Well, it's another binding by the royal binder, Mian.
And as you see, it's bigger than elephant folio.
It's three clasps.
It's got three clasps with Pete's arms and his crest.
His arms, his crest.
and his insignia as Secretary of the Admiralty.
You can see that this is a book that he particularly valued.
Magnificently tooled, the finest leather, gold, embossed.
The point of the book is actually the list of ordnance.
Guns of brass, guns of iron, gunpowder, shot of iron.
In other words, it's a practical thing.
And actually there is something that I do not normally tell people, and that is that the Mary Rose is a piece of wishful thinking, because she went, she was sunk.
A maiden voyage, wasn't it?
Well, virtually.
In 1545, this role was engrossed, was made up in 46.
But this is because they still hoped to raise her.
They really did.
There were Italian drivers.
working on her.
And they got ropes around her, tables around her.
So that must be why they put her in the row.
You can see why it was necessary?
Why Pepys being the Navy man, this was so appropriate for him.
The Mary Rose.
What does it say, the Mary Rose?
What does it give a tonnage?
The Mary Rose.
What does it say on the right there?
Oh, um... Tonnage, I guess.
Oh, no, it's of the line, ship of the line.
It's just something of the line.
Yes.
That's an old line officer.
I can recognize that.
This is great, sir.
I think that I've... Well, one last thing.
Okay.
This is, I mean, this is Pepys really fluctuating, correct?
Well, I mean, he was going to write this thing.
That is the cardio book, the Spanish Armada.
It's a listing.
on vitals.
Oh my God.
On every one of the Gariums.
Libro de Cabo, L-I-D-R-O, small D-E-C-A-I-G-O-S.
An inventory of stores carried by the Spanish Armada drawn up for the chief victualer, 1587, PL 226.
And 1587, because remember, it was going to sell in 1587, it didn't sell in 1588.
And if it had, it would be at the bottom of the channel someplace.
He must have bought this in Spain, because obviously it would never have gone with the Armada.
And in 1683, he managed to make a journey overland through Spain after winding up the British colony in Tangier.
And that's a tidal almanac, which is impressive.
Well, it belonged to France Drake, which is not even more impressive.
It makes it quite impressive, doesn't it?
And then sort of chart of the coasts of Northwest Europe and with the signature of France's Drake, Le Conquet.
Le Conquet, in Britain, yeah.
C-O-N-C-U-E-T, Brittany, 1546.1.
There's PO1.
It's book number one in the library.
Is that his book number one in the library?
Yes, yes.
I think it must have been a joke of Peeps' in the way.
Though the numbering does start with the smallest box.
Why would that be a joke?
Well, you know, I mean, Francis Drake's tried to nominate people.
And that is the Duke of York's Naval Pocketbook.
A list of ships and captains run up by Pepys and used by James II as Lord High Admiral 1667.
Quick reference.
It's fascinating because at the back there are some pencil notes, and if you put it under Rating Light, you can read them.
And they are records of wagers between the Duke of York and Mr. Pepys.
Anyway, well... I feel it.
I do feel... I'll conclude the tape at this point, if that's okay.
This has been a rare experience, sir.
Well, obviously, as you see, it's something which, in a way, can only be appreciated through explanation, and it is not like other libraries, that's certainly the case.
I have been seeing nothing but wonderful libraries for the past year, and I have to say it's...
I'm going to use the word unique.
I know you don't like it.
No, I think you can use it about this, because it's sufficiently complex.
But you does have to fight to persuade people that it is a beautiful, practical library.
Now, Pepe was actually a religious.
He did throw things out.
In the diary period, he throws a couple of books.
He gets rid of books.
Actually, that's because they're mildly pornographically.
He doesn't like having them.
But later on, he changed
If he bought a new edition of the book, then he would get rid of the old one.
The first editions were irrelevant in those days.
Absolutely.
The best editions.
This was the one area in which he made mistakes.
He obviously had a quite incredible feel for the importance of this.
I tried to indicate that his feeling was always related to one of his strands of radical thought.
But he sold his second
second folio shakespeare bought the four that's like thereby acquiring 22 000 mistress oh is is the is the fourth here yes i don't wish to see it but i'm just um